Values, variables, pointers, and references (#2006)
carbon-language/carbon-lang: docs/design/values.md

itself.

### Polymorphic types

Value expressions and value bindings can be used with
[polymorphic types](/docs/design/classes.md#inheritance), for example:

```carbon
base class MyBase { ... }

fn UseBase(b: MyBase) { ... }

class Derived {
  extend base: MyBase;
  ...
}

fn PassDerived() {
  var d: Derived = ...;
  // Allowed to pass `d` here:
  UseBase(d);
}
```

This is still allowed to create a copy or to move, but it must not _slice_. Even
if a copy is created, it must be a `Derived` object, even though this may limit
the available implementation strategies.

### Interop with C++ `const &` and `const` methods

While value expressions cannot have their address taken in Carbon, they should
be interoperable with C++ `const &`s and C++ `const`-qualified methods. This
will in-effect "pin" some object (potentially a copy or temporary) into memory
and allow C++ to take its address. Without supporting this, values would likely
create an untenable interop ergonomic barrier. However, this does create some
additional constraints on value expressions and a way that their addresses can
escape unexpectedly.

Despite interop requiring an address to implement, the address isn't guaranteed

> to be stable or useful or point back to some original object necessarily. The

Reviewer: Passive voice is making this less clear.
```suggestion
Despite interop requiring an address to implement, C++ doesn't require that the
address of a `const &` parameter is stable beyond the lifetime of the function,
or point back to some original object. The
```

ability of the implementation to introduce copies or a temporary specifically

> for the purpose of the interop remains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ability of the implementation to introduce copies or a temporary specifically
for the purpose of the interop remains.
```
```suggestion
C++ implementation already requires the ability to introduce copies or a temporary, which
also serves the needs of interop.
```

> 

Reviewer: Seems that this is missing the bit about why we aren't worried about C++ code casting away `const`. This is the text you had in `p2006.md`:

> It may seem risky to expose Carbon's value expressions to `const &` parameters
in this way, as C++ allows casting away `const`. However, in the absence of
`mutable` members, casting away `const` does not make it safe to _mutate_
through a `const &` parameter (or a `const`-qualified method). C++ objects can
be _declared_ `const`, and those objects are allowed to be implemented in
readonly memory and assumed to not mutate even if escaped. And `const &`
parameters can bind to these `const`-declared objects. As a consequence,
actually mutating through a `const &` parameter (perhaps after casting away
const) is a fundamentally unsafe operation in C++, and one that
[breaks in real implementations](https://cpp.compiler-explorer.com/z/KMhTondaK).
As a consequence, there is strong pressure that C++ code operate with `const &`
parameters in a way that will be fully compatible with Carbon's value
expressions.

(Wouldn't be bad to trim this down a bit. Need to go to bed now, though.)

Author: I tried to shorten it, but not sure it's actually shorter. Maybe it's a bit more accessible? 

Anyways, added this content, good call-out to make sure it is here.

-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
-   [References](#references)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Values, objects, and expressions

Carbon has both abstract _values_ and concrete _objects_. Carbon _values_ are
things like `42`, `true`, and `i32` (a type value). Carbon _objects_ have
_storage_ where values can be read and written. Storage also allows taking the
address of an object in memory in Carbon.

Both objects and values can be nested within each other. For example
`(true, true)` is both a value and also contains two sub-values. When a
two-tuple is stored somewhere, it is both a tuple-typed object and contains two
subobjects.

These terms are important components in the describing the semantics of Carbon
code, but they aren't sufficient. We also need to explicitly and precisely talk
about the Carbon _expressions_ that produce or reference values and objects.
Categorizing the expressions themselves allows us to be more precise and
articulate important differences not captured without looking at the expression
itself.

### Expression categories

There are three expression categories in Carbon:

-   [_Value expressions_](#value-expressions) produce abstract, read-only

>     _values_ that cannot be modified or have its address taken.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    _values_ that cannot be modified or have their address taken.
```

storage at all or a stable address of storage. Values are abstract constructs
like function input parameters and constants. They can be formed in two ways --
a literal expression like `42`, or by reading the value of some stored object.

A core goal of values in Carbon is to provide a single model that can get both
the efficiency of passing by value when working with small types such as those
that fit into a machine register, but also the efficiency of minimal copies when
working with types where a copy would require extra allocations or other costly
resources. This directly helps programmers by providing a simpler model to
select the mechanism of passing function inputs. But it is also important to
enable generic code that needs a single type model that will have generically
good performance.

When forming a value expression from a reference expression, Carbon
[binds](#value-binding) the referenced object to that value expression. This
allows immediately reading from the object's storage into a machine register or
a copy if desired, but does not require that. The read of the underlying object
can also be deferred until the value expression itself is used. Once an object

> is bound to a value expression in this way, any mutation to the object or it's

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is bound to a value expression in this way, any mutation to the object or its
```

> storage ends the lifetime of the value expression, and makes any use of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
storage ends the lifetime of the value binding, and makes any use of the
```
It seems clearer to me to talk about ending the lifetime of the binding than of the expression that created the binding.

explicit choice about whether they want to work with a restricted API and
leverage a custom value representation or not.

**Open question:** Beyond the specific syntax used where we currently have a
placeholder `value_rep = T;`, we need to explore exactly what the best
relationship is with the customization point. For example, should this syntax
immediately forward declare `impl as ReferenceImplicitAs where .T = T`, thereby
allowing an out-of-line definition of the `Convert` method and `... where _` to
pick up the associated type from the syntax. Alternatively, the syntactic marker
might be integrated into the `impl` declaration for `ReferenceImplicitAs`
itself.

### Polymorphic types

Value expressions and value bindings can be used with
[polymorphic types](/docs/design/classes.md#inheritance), for example:

```carbon
base class MyBase { ... }

fn UseBase(b: MyBase) { ... }

class Derived {
  extend base: MyBase;
  ...
}

fn PassDerived() {
  var d: Derived = ...;
  // Allowed to pass `d` here:
  UseBase(d);
}
```

This is still allowed to create a copy or to move, but it must not _slice_. Even
if a copy is created, it must be a `Derived` object, even though this may limit

> the available implementation strategies.

Reviewer 2: How does this interact with custom value representations? Can a base class have a custom value representation, or is that possible only for a final class? Can a derived class have a custom value representation if the base class doesn't somehow opt into it?

Perhaps the simplest thing would be to say that inheritance (that is, if the class is not final or has a base class) forces a value representation of `const Self*`, at least initially.

Reviewer 2: This is not a blocking comment; I'm happy to spin this out to an issue.

Author: My inclination is to have polymorphic types *default* to `const Self*`, *reject* an explicit `const Self`, and allow full customization -- but full customization is responsible for producing sensible results in the polymorphic case.

Left a future work item in the text so this isn't forgotten.

### Interop with C++ `const &` and `const` methods

While value expressions cannot have their address taken in Carbon, they should
be interoperable with C++ `const &`s and C++ `const`-qualified methods. This
will in-effect "pin" some object (potentially a copy or temporary) into memory
and allow C++ to take its address. Without supporting this, values would likely
create an untenable interop ergonomic barrier. However, this does create some
additional constraints on value expressions and a way that their addresses can
escape unexpectedly.

Despite interop requiring an address to implement, C++ doesn't require that the
address of a `const &` parameter is stable beyond the lifetime of the function,
or point back to some original object. The C++ implementation already requires
the ability to introduce copies or a temporary, which also serves the needs of

> interop.

Reviewer 2: I think I see what you're saying here, but I wonder if we can phrase this a bit more narrowly somehow. (A `const &` parameter that's bound to what we would call a durable reference expression in Carbon doesn't allow copies or a temporary.)

I think the point is: a `const &` parameter in C++ is always able to bind to a temporary, so a cautious callee can't rely on the address of the argument being stable in general, or remaining valid after the callee returns.

Author: Sure, tried a phrasing closer to that. WDYT?

> **Future work:** when a type customizes its value representation, as currently
> specified this will break the use of `const &` C++ APIs with such a value. We
> should extend the rules around value representation customization to require
> that either the representation type can be converted to (a copy) of the
> customized type, or implements an interop-specific interface to compute a
> `const` pointer to the original object used to form the representation object.
> This will allow custom representations to either create copies for interop or
> retain a pointer to the original object and expose that for interop as

> > desired.

Reviewer 2: Hm, there's something subtle here. We define "copy initialization" as going from a reference expression to an initialization expression -- a copy starts with an object and produces another one. But what we're doing here is more like "half a copy", where we're going from a value expression to an initialization expression -- this is direct initialization from the same type. (This is incidentally exactly what `impl T as ImplicitAs(T)` does.)

I wonder if we could find a term for this.

Reviewer 2: (This is just a musing: I'm not expecting any action on this comment.)

Author: We call this "direct initialization" currently, without respect to the type.

We could talk about a "non-converting direct initialization" I guess, but not sure the same-type-ness has any really relevance *except* in the case of not synthesizing an `ImplecitAs`?

managed and linked to from here.

The first place where an initializing expression is _required_ is to satisfy
[_variable patterns_](#binding-patterns-and-local-variables-with-let-and-var).
These require the expression they match to be an initializing expression for the
storage they create. The simplest example is the expression after the `=` in a
local `var` declaration.

The next place where a Carbon expression requires an initializing expression is
the expression operand to `return` statements. We expand more completely on how
return statements interact with expressions, values, objects, and storage
[below](#function-calls-and-returns).

The last path that requires forming an initializing expression in Carbon is when
attempting to convert a non-reference expression into an ephemeral reference
expression: the expression is first converted to an initializing expression if
necessary, and then temporary storage is materialized to act as its output, and
as the referent of the resulting ephemeral reference expression.

### Function calls and returns

Functions with a return type and return statement in Carbon are called

> _returning functions_. Calls to these functions are modeled directly as

Reviewer 2: I'm not a fan of the term "returning function"; it sounds like the other kind of function would be a "non-returning function", that is, one that never returns, rather than one that implicitly returns `()`. I'd like the term "value-returning function" except of course that a call to such a function is an initializing expression not a value expression...

Also, I don't think the presence or absence of a return statement should matter here. `fn F() -> T { exit(); }` seems like it should be a returning function to me -- the expression category of `F()` shouldn't depend on whether the body contains a return statement.

Actually, do we need this term at all? Can we just say that all functions behave this way, and that `fn F() {}` means that `F()` is an initializing expression of type `()`, exactly the same as `fn F() -> () { return (); }`?

Author: We already differentiate functions based on whether they have `-> ...` or not (to guide whether the `return` statement has an expression.

I somewhat like this distinction FWIW -- I suspect there are reasonable things to do to the value `()` like call a `.size()` method on it. As a consequence, I wouldn't want to produce an error on this code:

```carbon
fn Empty() -> () { return (); }

fn Test1() {
  // Assuming some "size" method...
  Empty().size();

  let x: auto = Empty();

  // Do something with `x`...
}
```

But it would seem nice to be able to produce errors here:

```carbon
fn Bad() {}

fn Test2() {
  // ERROR: doesn't return anything
  Bad().size();

  // ERROR: cannot initialize `x` in the absence of anything being returned
  let x: auto = Empty();
}
```

However, I also see the reason to not like this model -- propagating the return type from a callable parameter to your own return type seems likely to be made more confusing / frustrating here.

For now, let's just making this all functions as you suggest. That seems the simplest incremental step.

-   [Syntax-free or automatic dereferencing](/proposals/p2006.md#syntax-free-or-automatic-dereferencing)
-   [Exclusively using references](/proposals/p2006.md#exclusively-using-references)

### Pointer syntax

The type of a pointer to a type `T` is written with a postfix `*` as in `T*`.
Dereferencing a pointer is a [_reference expression_] and is written with a
prefix `*` as in `*p`:

```carbon
var i: i32 = 42;
var p: i32* = &i;

// Form a reference expression `*p` and assign `13` to the referenced storage.
*p = 13;
```

This syntax is chosen specifically to remain as similar as possible to C++
pointer types as they are commonly written in code and are expected to be
extremely common and a key anchor of syntactic similarity between the languages.
The different alternatives and tradeoffs for this syntax issue were discussed
extensively in [#523] and are summarized in the
[proposal](/proposals/p2006.md#alternative-pointer-syntaxes).

[#523]: https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/523

Carbon also supports an infix `->` operation, much like C++. However, Carbon
directly defines this as an exact rewrite to `*` and `.` so that `p->member`

> becomes `(*p).member` for example.

Reviewer 2: It took me a moment to realize what important detail this "However" was describing, in contrast to C++. Maybe it's worth spelling out that in Carbon there is no overloaded `operator->`, and instead customizing the behavior of `*p` is what governs the behavior of `->`?

Author: Sure, added. WDYT?

-   [`const`-qualified types](#const-qualified-types)
-   [Lifetime overloading](#lifetime-overloading)
-   [Alternatives considered](#alternatives-considered)
-   [References](#references)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Values, objects, and expressions

Carbon has both abstract _values_ and concrete _objects_. Carbon _values_ are
things like `42`, `true`, and `i32` (a type value). Carbon _objects_ have
_storage_ where values can be read and written. Storage also allows taking the
address of an object in memory in Carbon.

Both objects and values can be nested within each other. For example
`(true, true)` is both a value and also contains two sub-values. When a
two-tuple is stored somewhere, it is both a tuple-typed object and contains two
subobjects.

These terms are important components in the describing the semantics of Carbon
code, but they aren't sufficient. We also need to explicitly and precisely talk
about the Carbon _expressions_ that produce or reference values and objects.
Categorizing the expressions themselves allows us to be more precise and
articulate important differences not captured without looking at the expression
itself.

> ### Expression categories

Reviewer 3: This PR should probably also update the "Value categories and value phases" section of `docs/design/README.md`

Author: Thanks for the reminder, done.

I've also merged the (very little) distinct content of `variables.md` into this document so we have a single cohesive discussion.

There are three expression categories in Carbon:

-   [_Value expressions_](#value-expressions) produce abstract, read-only
    _values_ that cannot be modified or have its address taken.
-   [_Reference expressions_](#reference-expressions) refer to _objects_ with
    _storage_ where a value may be read or written and the object's address can
    be taken.
    -   [_Durable reference expressions_](#durable-reference-expressions) are
        reference expressions which cannot refer to _temporary_ storage, but
        must refer to some storage that outlives the full expression.
    -   [_Ephemeral reference expressions_](#ephemeral-reference-expressions)
        are reference expressions which _can_ refer to temporary storage.
-   [_Initializing expressions_](#initializing-expressions) which require
    storage to be provided implicitly when evaluating the expression. The
    expression then initializes an object in that storage. These are used to
    model function returns, which can construct the returned value directly in
    the caller's storage.

The general conversions and the semantics implied between these categories are
below:

> -   An _initializing expression_ can be formed from:

Reviewer 3: I think this list would be clearer if it was grouped by source node rather than destination node (e.g. "An initializing expression can be converted to: ..."). When I'm trying to think through multistep traversals, that's the structure that feels most natural: "I'm here, where can I go next?" rather than "I'm trying to get there, where can I come from to arrive there?". Furthermore, I think it will make it easier to see the big picture: durable reference has outbound edges to all the other nodes, and the other nodes each have a single outbound edge (which is part of a cycle).

(But see below for other suggestions that might make this moot)

Author: I believe this is addressed by the large reorganization here.

    -   A _value expression_ by using the value to initialize an object in the
        provided storage, analogous to
        [direct initialization](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/direct_initialization)
        in C++.
    -   A _durable reference expression_ by copying the referenced object into
        the new storage, analogous to
        [copy initialization](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/copy_initialization)
        in C++.
-   An _ephemeral reference expression_ can be formed from:
    -   A _durable reference expression_ trivially.
    -   An _initializing expression_ by materializing temporary storage for an
        object that is initialized and then referencing that object.
-   A _durable reference expression_ cannot be produced by converting from
    another expression category.
-   A _value expression_ can be formed from a _reference expression_ by reading

>     the value from its storage.

Reviewer 3: This seems at odds with the discussion around line 286 about how a value expression may be implemented as a reference, and how we specifically encourage using a const reference as the mental model. In that case, the conversion to a value expression does not access the reference expression's storage, right?

Author: Yeah.

I don't have a good idea of what the better terminology would be. See below where you gave this operation a really nice name based on this, but that may even worsen the misapprehension.

Reviewer: I agree this text is misleading and it would be more accurate to link to the bit where the configuration of value representation for a type is described, possibly with a short summary here -- or even "this may involve reading the value from its storage"

Author: We now have updated text and an updated name!

I'm trying out "value binding" here and saying that the value expression *binds* an object in storage.

The goal is to get at the idea that mutation breaks that binding and that the two are linked until broken.

Mini brain-storming didn't come up with any better terminology than this. While it's a bit unfortunate to overlap a bit with *name* binding, I actually don't mind it, and in fact binding a name to a value also often binds that value to an object.

(Or should it bind the object to the value? Interested in what the best directionality is here.)

Author: Going to resolve this for now -- we've had a few open discussions around the name, and so far "value binding" seems to be working. That's easy to change or fix if better ideas emerge though.

There is content here that tries to be much more explicit about whether a read occurs so I think the core concern around accurately representing is fully addressed. That said, if I'm missing something or the new content still is missing stuff, please re-open or leave a fresh comment!

Multiple steps of these conversions can be combined. For example, to produce a
value expression from an initializing expression, first the initializing
expression is converted to an ephemeral reference expression by materializing
temporary storage and initializing an object stored there, and that is then
turned into the desired value expression by reading the value from that stored

> object.

Reviewer: Looks like only two entries in the table have not been specified:

| source <br> target  | value | durable ref | ephemeral ref | initializing |
|--:|---|---|---|---|
| **value** | == | read from storage | read from storage | via ephemeral ref |
| **durable ref** | ❌ not allowed ❌ | == | ❌  not allowed ❌ | ❌  not allowed ❌ |
| **ephemeral ref** |   | trivial | == | allocate temporary |
| **initializing** | direct initialization | copying initialization |  | == |

Seems worthwhile to just explicitly answer what every entry in this table is and then include it in the document:

- Is ephemeral ref -> initializing expression a copying initialization or via a value expression (as [asked](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/2006/files#r1169217402))
- Is value -> ephemeral ref expression via an initializing expression (direct initialization + allocate temporary), or something else? Update: from  the "Initializing expressions" section below, this seems to be the case.

Reviewer 3: I think the question here is what information we want to convey. I can think of three possibilities (which are non-exclusive):

- What kinds of conversions are possible at all?
- What primitive computational steps may be used to implement those conversions?
- What sequence of steps does each possible conversion perform?

I wonder if it would make sense to address those three questions somewhat separately: first, specify that a durable reference expression can be converted to any of the other three, and that any of the other three can be converted to each other. Next, list the possible kinds of primitive conversions (I really like your idea of giving them names, although I've tinkered with some of the specific choices):

- A _read_ converts a reference expression to a value expression.
- _Copy initialization_ converts a reference expression to an initializing expression.
- _Direct initialization_ converts a value expression to an initializing expression.
- _Materialization_ converts an initializing expression to an ephemeral reference.
- _Reference decay_ converts a durable reference expression to an ephemeral reference expression.

Finally, we note that in some cases we need to chain two of those primitive conversions. We can follow that with a 4x4 table as a summary, although I'm not sure that it's necessary -- does it matter whether ephemeral->initializing uses a single copy initialization, or a read followed by a direct initialization? When there are multiple feasible paths, are we willing to lock ourselves into a particular one?

(But see the comment on line 252 below, which might make all of this moot)

Author: I've gone with what I think is a simplified version of all of this. I like it a lot.

My only hesitation remaining is the term "read" -- this will *some times* be a read and other times it will not because we will implicitly use reference semantics.

While the program is supposed to never *rely* on observing the distinction, I worry that calling this transformation a "read" will give the user the wrong idea

On the flip side, for the majority of values in the program, this is likely a really good mental model, as those are pointers, ints, and floats, and they are in fact read here.

Thoughts?

## Binding patterns and local variables with `let` and `var`

[_Binding patterns_](/docs/design/README.md#binding-patterns) introduce names
that are [_value expressions_](#value-expressions) by default and are called
_value bindings_. This is the desired default for many pattern contexts,
especially function parameters. Values are a good model for "input" function
parameters which are the dominant and default style of function parameters:

```carbon
fn Sum(x: i32, y: i32) -> i32 {
  // `x` and `y` are value expressions here. We can use their value, but not
  // modify them or take their address.
  return x + y;
}
```

Value bindings require the matched expression to be a _value expression_,
converting it into one as necessary.

A _variable pattern_ can be introduced with the `var` keyword to create an

> object with storage when match.d Every binding pattern name introduced within a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
object with storage when matched. Every binding pattern name introduced within a
```

variable pattern is called a _variable binding_ and forms a

> [_reference expression_](#reference-expressions) to an object within the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[_durable reference expression_](#durable-reference-expressions) to an object within the
```

variable pattern's storage when used. Variable patterns require their matched
expression to be an _initializing expression_ and provide their storage to it to
be initialized.

```carbon
fn MutateThing(ptr: i64*);

fn Example() {
  // Both `1` and `2` here start as value expressions. That is a match for `1`.
  // For `2`, the variable binding requires it to be converted to an
  // initializing expression by using the value `2` to initialize the provided
  // variable storage that `y` will refer to.

>   let (x: i64, var y: i64) = (1, 2);

Reviewer: This seems like a complicated example to start with. Perhaps redo this as two declarations, and then later show destructuring as an example of patterns used in declarations of locals?

```suggestion
  // Both `1` and `2` here start as value expressions. That is a match for `1`.
  let x: i64 = 1;
  // For `2`, the variable binding requires it to be converted to an
  // initializing expression by using the value `2` to initialize the provided
  // variable storage that `y` will refer to.
  var y: i64 = 2;
```

Author: My goal had been to avoid two top-level introducers to start, and so to start with the nested structure.

But I don't feel strongly and can rearrange to explain the other way.

  // Allowed to take the address and mutate `y` as it is a durable reference
  // expression.
  MutateThing(&y);

  // ❌ This would be an error though due to trying to take the address of the
  // value expression `x`.
  MutateThing(&x);
}
```

### Local variables

A local binding pattern can be introduced with either the `let` or `var`
keyword. The `let` introducer begins a value pattern just like the default
patterns in other contexts. The `var` introducer works exactly the same as
introducing the pattern in some other context with `var` -- there's just no need
for the outer `let`.

-   `let` _identifier_`:` _< expression |_ `auto` _>_ `=` _value_`;`

> -   `var` _identifier_`:` _< expression |_ `auto` _> [_ `=` _value ]_`;`

Reviewer: The angle brackets seems weird to me here. I would expect those to be round parens.

Author: I may have messed up my copying of the grammar syntax here, sorry about that. Hopefully fixed.

These are just simple examples of binding patterns used directly in local

> declarations. Local `let` and `var` declarations build on Carbon's general

Reviewer: Do you want to explicitly give an example showing what else can be done here, or even just reference or move the previous `let (x: i64, var y: i64) =` example.

Author: Yeah, w/o the destructuring above can move it here. Hopefully done with comments tweaked appropriately.

[pattern matching](/docs/design/pattern_matching.md) design, with `var`
declarations implicitly starting off within a `var` pattern while `let`
declarations introduce patterns that work the same as function parameters and

> others with bindings that produce values by default.

Reviewer: Please break up long sentence

a [pointer](#pointers) to the `self` parameter for such methods.

### Durable reference expressions

_Durable reference expressions_ are those where the object's storage outlives
the full expression and the address could be meaningfully propagated out of it
as well.

There are two contexts that require a durable reference expression in Carbon:

-   [Assignment statements](/docs/design/assignment.md) require the
    left-hand-side of the `=` to be a durable reference. This stronger
    requirement is enforced before the expression is rewritten to dispatch into
    the `Carbon.Assign.Op` interface method.
-   [Address-of expressions](#pointer-syntax) require their operand to be a
    durable reference and compute the address of the referenced object.

There are several kinds of expressions that produce durable references in
Carbon:

-   Names of objects introduced with a
    [variable binding](#binding-patterns-and-local-variables-with-let-and-var):
    `x`
-   Dereferenced [pointers](#pointers): `*p`
-   Names of subobjects through member access to some other durable reference
    expression: `x.member` or `p->member`

> -   [Indexing](/docs/design/expressions/indexing.md): `array[i]`

Reviewer: My understanding is that indexing *sometimes* produces a durable reference, but won't when, for example, indexing into a temporary array value.

Author: Clarified.

There is no way to convert another category of expression into a durable
reference expression, they always directly refer to some declared variable

> binding.

Reviewer: This last part doesn't seem to be true: can't they also refer to storage on the heap via dereferencing a pointer?

Author: But that doesn't convert an expression category to a durable reference expression?

This is saying that -- given a non-durable-reference-expression, you can't do a *category conversion* to arrive at a durable reference. You either have to start with one, or you have to use one of the above *new* expressions to produce one. Not sure waht would help clarify here though?

Author: I've tried to reword this to make it more clear.

### Ephemeral reference expressions

_Ephemeral reference expressions_ still refer to storage, but it may be storage
materialized for a temporary that will not outlive the full expression. Their
address can only be taken implicitly as part of a method call.

The only expressions in Carbon that directly require an ephemeral reference are
method calls where the method is marked with the `addr` specifier. However, they
are frequently indirectly required to enable converting an initializing
expression into a value expression.

Ephemeral reference expressions can only be formed by conversion from another

> expression category. In the trivial case, a durable reference expression can be

Reviewer 3: This seems to be saying that "ephemeral referenceness" isn't a property of an expression at all, but a property of how the expression is used. And it seems like the same is true of initializing expressions. That being the case, it seems like what we have here isn't really four kinds of expressions, but two kinds of expressions (durable reference expressions and everything else) and four kinds of _contexts_ that an expression can appear in (or maybe less than four?). I think I would find this substantially less confusing if presented in those terms. In addition to addressing the basic conceptual mismatch I started with, it would more clearly connect to the distinction between objects and values (the two kinds of expression are ones that produce objects and ones that produce values), and I think it would help with the tangle of questions around how to present the conversions: instead of describing a possibly-cyclic graph of conversions among expression categories, we specify how a given kind of expression is adapted to a given context, for each of the 8 possible expression/context pairs.

Author: Still thinking about this, but I feel like this loses a really important distinction -- ephemeral reference expressions have restrictions that durable ones do not.

Once you have formed an ephemeral reference expression, it's not just a context?

Author: After more thought, I think the distinction here remains useful, but I think I've found a way to simplify the place where this is confusing.

The "durable" vs. "ephemeral" distinction is no longer part of the main category description or any of the conversions. It wasn't needed there, as the behavior is really a common set of behaviors for *reference* expressions. Now the distinction is only brought up afterward and only to explain the additional restrictions.

As a consequence, I've also shortened and focused this section. My hope is that the distinction between durable and ephemeral can be systematically narrowed to lifetime and restrictions imposed to provide safety in the face of lifetime. But the behavior (when allowed) is always specified in a single common way for all reference expressions.

WDYT?

Author: Resolving this for now, happy to re-open if needed though.

used. They can also be formed by materializing temporary storage to provide to
an initializing expression, and referencing the initialized object in that
storage.

**Future work:** The current design allows directly requiring an ephemeral
reference for `addr`-methods because this replicates the flexibility in C++ --
very few C++ methods are L-value-ref-qualified which would have a similar effect
to `addr`-methods requiring a durable reference expression. This is leveraged
frequently in C++ for builder APIs and other patterns. However, Carbon provides
more tools in this space than C++ already, and so it may be worth evaluating
whether we can switch `addr`-methods to the same restrictions as assignment and
`&`. Temporaries would never have their address escaped (in a safe way) in that
world and there would be fewer different kinds of entities. But this is reserved
for future work as we should be very careful about the expressivity hit being

> tolerable both for native-Carbon API design and for migrated C++ code.

Reviewer: We talked in person about using `[returned var self: Self]` for the builder pattern. Seems like that would allow us to restrict `addr self` to only match durable reference expressions.

Author: Maybe? I'm mostly trying to not add any more scope here and leave this to the future work.

Reviewer: I think my point is that the proposal could have less scope here and a simpler story by not allowing ephemeral references to be passed to `addr` methods. I feel like this proposal is already picking a solution to the builder pattern question, and additional complexity to achieve it.

Author: > I think my point is that the proposal could have less scope here and a simpler story by not allowing ephemeral references to be passed to `addr` methods. I feel like this proposal is already picking a solution to the builder pattern question, and additional complexity to achieve it.

I don't think the use of ephemeral references by an `addr` method is purely for builders. I think there are other patterns where this will be desirable. At a minimum, C++ allows calling non-const methods on temporary objects, not to mention `const` methods on objects with mutable members -- all of these will need an interop story and a migration target. The most obvious path to me is to allow `addr` methods to be called on temporaries.

The cost of keeping this seems lower than the cost of trying to work through all the design patterns and migration scenarios to be sufficiently confident that this won't be a massive migration barrier. And it would also significantly increase our reliance on an innovation that isn't well proven. I haven't yet added the `returned` qualifier on parameters to this proposal. I *think* it makes sense, and I agree that the proposal as-is is already heavily nudging us in that direction for builders. But I also think the added complexity paid for to remove NRVO and RVO subtlety from the language already.

object, that original object must not be mutated prior to the last use of the
value, or any transitive value. We consider this restriction experimental as we
may want to strengthen or weaken it based on our experience with Carbon code
using these constructs, and especially interoperating with C++.

Even with these restrictions, we expect to make values in Carbon useful in
roughly the same places as `const &`s in C++, but with added efficiency in the
case where the values can usefully be kept in machine registers. We also
specifically encourage a mental model of a `const &` with extra efficiency.

### Comparison to C++ parameters

While these are called "values" in Carbon, they are not related to "by-value"
parameters as they exist in C++. The semantics of C++'s by-value parameters are
defined to create a new local copy of the argument, although it may move into
this copy.

Carbon's values are much closer to a `const &` in C++ with extra restrictions
such as allowing copies under "as-if" and preventing taking the address.
Combined, these restrictions allow implementation strategies such as in-register
parameters.

> ### Value representation and customization

Reviewer 3: This section seems like it doesn't belong in the middle of a discussion of expression categories, because it's more about the value itself, rather than the expression that forms it.

You've mentioned that you're concerned with how long this document is -- maybe the discussion of expression categories could go in `docs/design/expressions/README.md`, and the discussion of things like value representation could stay here?

Author: I'm very hesitant to move the rest of this document down to expressions because it feels like it has more fundamental implications across the language design.

Specifically, it talks about the object model, and how we might avoid reference types, etc.

I could extract this section to its own document, but a few things give me pause:
- It is fairly short, so it will be a pretty minimal separation.
- This section is important to answer an expressivity question of how to implement inline buffer optimized data structures in this model.
- There are a few other cross references that might be a bit awkward.

I could easily pull polymorphic types above this.

I could also hoist this to its own top-level section in order to let the reader get through reference exprs, value exprs, and initializing exprs before we get into this. WDYT?

Reviewer 3: Hoisting this to a top-level section seems like a plausible compromise.

Author: Done.

can appear where a member declaration would be valid within the type:

```carbon
class SomeType {
  value_rep = RepresentationType;
}
```

**Open question:** The syntax for this is just placeholder, using a placeholder
keyword. It isn't final at all and likely will need to change to read well.

The provided representation type must be one of the following:

-   `const Self` -- this forces the use of a _copy_ of the object.
-   `const Self *` -- this forces the use of a [_pointer_](#pointers) to the
    original object.
-   A custom type that is not `Self`.

If the representation is `const Self` or `const Self *`, then the type fields
will be accessible as [_value expressions_](#value-expressions) using the normal
member access syntax for value expressions of a type. These will be implemented
by either accessing a copy of the object in the non-pointer case or a pointer to
the original object in the pointer case. A representation of `const Self`
requires copying to be valid for the type. This provides the builtin
functionality but allows explicitly controlling which representation should be
used. If no customization is provided, the implementation will select one based

> on a set of heuristics.

Reviewer: Would it be worth explicitly listing some of those? For example, that `abstract` and `base` classes, along with non-copyable types like `std::unique_ptr<>`, would use `const Self *`?

When a custom type is provided, it must not be `Self` (or the other two cases).
The type provided will be used on function call boundaries and as the
implementation representation for `let` bindings and other value expressions
referencing an object of the type. A specifier of `value_rep = T;` will require
that the type `impls ReferenceImplicitAs(T)` using the following interface:

```carbon
interface ReferenceImplicitAs(T:! type) {

>   fn Op[addr self: const Self*]() -> T;

Reviewer: `Op` or `Convert`?

Author: I don't feel super strongly about how we name this.

I leaned towards `Op` because it specifically *isn't* the `Convert` method of `ImplicitAs` -- it is subtly different.

But if folks are comfortable with that distinction being carried by the interface name, sure.

Reviewer: From discussion: I felt like this is a conversion that is a replacement for `ImplicitAs`, and should use the same name as `ImplicitAs`. There is some argument that `ImplicitAs` should use `Op` to match the other operations, though.

Author: Updated to reflect this and align with `ImplicitAs`. We can change them together in the future if desired.

}
```

Converting a reference expression into a value expression for such a type calls
this customization point to form a representation object from the original
reference expression.

When using a custom representation type in this way, no fields are accessible
through a value expression. Instead, only methods can be called using member
access, as they simply bind the value expression to the `self` parameter.

> However, one important method can be called -- `.(ImplicitAs(T).Convert()`. This

Reviewer: Imbalanced parens:

```suggestion
However, one important method can be called -- `ImplicitAs(T).Convert()`. This
```

or

```suggestion
However, one important method can be called -- `.(ImplicitAs(T).Convert)()`. This
```

or

```suggestion
However, one important method can be called -- `.(ImplicitAs(T).Convert)`. This
```

or

```suggestion
However, one important method can be called -- `ImplicitAs(T).Convert`. This
```

implicitly converting a value expression for the type into its custom
representation type. The customization of the representation above causes the
class to have a builtin `impl as ImplicitAs(T)` which converts to the
representation type as a no-op, exposing the object created by the
`ReferenceImplicitAs` operation, and preserved as a representation of the value
expression.

Here is a more complete example of code using these features:

```carbon
class StringView {
  // A typical readonly view of a string API...

>   fn ExampleMethod[self: Self]() { ... }

Reviewer: Doesn't this need `data_ptr` and `size` fields and a `Create` class function?

}

class String {
  // Customize the value representation to be `StringView`.
  value_rep = StringView;

  private var data_ptr: Char*;

>   private var size: i64;

Reviewer: Add `capacity` to make this interesting?

Reviewer: In particular, it would be good to explain what happens with methods that would be `const` in C++, but can't be called with just the information available in the r-value representation.

Author: Good idea. Adjusted the example and added a paragraph about this.

  // implementation will be constrained because of the custom value rep.
  fn ExampleMethod2[self: String]() {
    // Error due to custom value rep:
    self.data_ptr;

    // Fine, this uses the builtin `ImplicitAs(StringView)`.
    (self as StringView).ExampleMethod();
  }

  impl as ReferenceImplicitAs(StringView) {
    fn Op[addr self: const Self*]() -> StringView {
      // Because this is called on the String object prior to it becoming
      // a value, we can access an SSO buffer or other interior pointers
      // of `self`.
      return StringView::Create(self->data_ptr, self->size);
    }
  }
}
```

It is important to note that the _representation_ type of a value expression is
just its representation and does not impact the name lookup or type. Name lookup
and `impl` search occur for the same type regardless of the expression category.
But once a particular method or function is selected, an implicit conversion can
occur from the original type to the representation type as part of the parameter
or receiver type. In fact, this conversion is the _only_ operation that can
occur for a customized representation type, wherever it is necessary as

> implemented.

Reviewer: "wherever it is necessary as implemented" seems a bit vague. Could you be more specific that this is the only operation for values of a type with customized representation type?

Author: That was what I was trying to do, but I managed to really mess up the sentence, sorry.

Hopefully fixed.

customized type, or implements an interop-specific interface to compute a
`const` pointer to the original object used to form the representation object.
This will allow custom representations to either create copies for interop or
retain a pointer to the original object and expose that for interop as desired.

### Escape hatches for value addresses in Carbon

**Open question:** It may be necessary to provide some amount of escape hatch
for taking the address of values. The
[C++ interop](#interop-with-c-const--and-const-methods) above already takes
their address functionally. Currently, this is the extent of an escape hatch to
the restrictions on values.

If a further escape hatch is needed, this kind of fundamental weakening of the
semantic model would be a good case for some syntactic marker like Rust's
`unsafe`, although rather than a region, it would seem better to tie it directly
to the operation in question. For example:

```carbon
class S {
  fn ValueMemberFunction[me: Self]();
  fn AddrMemberFunction[addr me: const Self*]();
}

fn F(s_value: S) {
  // This is fine.
  s_value.ValueMemberFunction();

  // This requires an unsafe marker in the syntax.

>   s_value.unsafe MutableMemberFunction();

Reviewer: Mismatch, either:

```suggestion
  fn AddrMemberFunction[addr me: const Self*]();
}

fn F(s_value: S) {
  // This is fine.
  s_value.ValueMemberFunction();

  // This requires an unsafe marker in the syntax.
  s_value.unsafe AddrMemberFunction();
```

or:

```suggestion
  fn MutableMemberFunction[addr me: const Self*]();
}

fn F(s_value: S) {
  // This is fine.
  s_value.ValueMemberFunction();

  // This requires an unsafe marker in the syntax.
  s_value.unsafe MutableMemberFunction();
```

Reference expressions have the object they refer to copied into a new object in
the provided storage.

**Future work:** The design should be expanded to fully cover how copying is
managed and linked to from here.

The first place where an initializing expression is _required_ is to satisfy
[_variable patterns_](#binding-patterns-and-local-variables-with-let-and-var).
These require the expression they match to be an initializing expression for the
storage they create. The simplest example is the expression after the `=` in a
local `var` declaration.

The next place where a Carbon expression requires an initializing expression is
the expression operand to `return` statements. We expand more completely on how
return statements interact with expressions, values, objects, and storage
[below](#function-calls-and-returns).

The last path that requires forming an initializing expression in Carbon is when
attempting to convert a non-reference expression into an ephemeral reference
expression, where temporary storage is materialized and provided to an
initializing expression. The resulting object can then form the ephemeral

> reference expression.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The last path that requires forming an initializing expression in Carbon is when
attempting to convert a non-reference expression into an ephemeral reference
expression: the expression is first converted to an initializing expression if necessary,
and then temporary storage is materialized to act as its output, and as the referent
of the resulting ephemeral reference expression.
```

### Function calls and returns

Functions with a return type and return statement in Carbon are called
_returning functions_. Calls to these functions are modeled directly as
initializing expressions -- they require storage as an input and when evaluated

> cause that storage to be initialized with an object. This means that when a

Reviewer 3: This sounds like it means that `F(G())` can't be implemented by moving the return-value register to the first-argument register -- the return value of `G()` has to be materialized in memory. Is that accurate?

Author: Notionally, yes.

C++ has the same *notional* property FWIW. I think this is a place where things are actually very similar to C++ as-is.

Reviewer 3: By "notionally" do you mean those operations can only be omitted under as-if? i.e. if the object passed from `G` to `F` has a user-defined type, we have to actually perform two copy/move operations unless the compiler can prove they have no observable side effects? If so, it'd be nice if we could avoid constraining ourselves that way.

Of course, we can always add rules later to permit eliding those operations in some cases. I do wonder if there's another way of describing the semantics where the notional-but-elided operations don't occur in the first place (as there turned out to be for RVO in C++), but it probably doesn't make sense to further delay this proposal to try to find it.

Author: Largely agreed.

I'm not sure this is as bad as you're imagining though -- when this can't happen under as-if, similarly, the argument to `F` is going to have to be in memory and not in a machine register.

There are two cases -- `F1(x: T)` and `F2(var x: T)`.

I expect for `F1` that this is going to materialize a temporary in memory, initialize it with the call to `G`, and then bind that to a value parameter to `F1`, which will likely use a `const T*` value representation give that the address is observable under as-if.

And for `F2`, we will allocate a parameter variable for `x`, initialize it with the call to `G`, and then make that available to `F2` without any copy or move.

If there is something further we can do here, then we should definitely explore that and add further restrictions, but agreed about not delaying.

function call is used to initialize some variable pattern as here:

```carbon
fn CreateMyObject() -> MyType {
  return <return-expression>;
}

var x: MyType = CreateMyObject();
```

The `<return-expression>` in the `return` statement actually initializes the
storage provided for `x`. There is no "copy" or other step.

All `return` statement expressions are required to be initializing expressions
and in fact initialize the storage provided to the returning function's call
expression. This in turn causes the property to hold _transitively_ across an
arbitrary number of function calls and returns. The storage is forwarded at each
stage and initialized exactly once.

#### Deferred initialization from values and references

Carbon also makes the evaluation of returning function calls and return

> statements are tightly linked in order to enable more efficiency improvements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
statements tightly linked in order to enable more efficiency improvements.
```

It allows the actual initialization performed by the `return` statement with its

> expression can be deferred from within the body of the function to the caller

Reviewer: ```suggestion
expression to be deferred from within the body of the function to the caller
```

initializer expression if it can simply propagate a value or reference
expression to the caller that is guaranteed to be alive and available to the
caller.

Consider the following code:

```carbon
fn SelectSecond(first: Point, second: Point, third: Point) -> Point {
  return second;
}

fn UsePoint(p: Point);

fn F(p1: Point, p2: Point) {
  UsePoint(SelectSecond(p2, p1, p2));
}
```

The call to `SelectSecond` must provide storage for a `Point` that can be
initialized. However, Carbon allows an implementation of the actual
`SelectSecond` function to not initialize this storage when it reaches
`return second`. Because the expression `second` is a value expression which is
necessarily valid in the caller, Carbon allows an implementation that simply
communicates that this value expression is the return expression and _if

> necessary_ should initialize the temporary storage. This in turn allows the

Reviewer 3: When you say "this value expression", which value expression do you mean? The phrasing of the sentence makes it sound like you mean the operand of `return` (i.e. `second`), but does that mean the same optimization could apply if the function ended with `return second.x;`? Or `return first + second;`? If so, that's way outside my mental model of function calling conventions, at least in a C-like language, so I feel like it would need a lot more explanation. Or would it be more accurate to say that "this value expression" actually refers to the argument expression that `second` is bound to (i.e. `p1`), and/or that we're actually talking about the _binding_ named `second`, rather than a specific expression that names it?

Author: It's the about the binding.

I've reworded to try and get at this a bit more clearly, PTAL.

Author: (resolving as I think this is addressed)

specific strategies here based on concrete types without harming generic code.
There is always a generic fallback as well if monomorphization isn't desired.

This freedom mirrors that of [input values](#value-expressions) where might be
implemented as either a reference or a copy without breaking genericity. Here
too, many small types will not need to be lazy and simply eagerly initialize the
temporary which is implemented as an actual machine register. But for large
types or ones with associated allocated storage, this can reliably avoid
extraneous memory allocations and other costs.

Note that this flexibility doesn't avoid the call expression materializing
temporary storage and providing it to the function. Whether the function needs
this storage is an implementation detail. It simply allows deferring an
important case of initializing that storage from a value or reference expression
already available in the caller to the caller so that it can identify cases
where that initialization is not necessary.

**References:** This addresses an issue-for-leads about
[reducing the potential copies incurred by returns](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/828).

> #### Declared `returned` variable

Reviewer: Some redundancy with the "`returned var`" section of `docs/design/control_flow/return.md`?

Author: How would you prefer to balance the content between the two documents? I don't feel very strongly either way.

Author: Re-reading it, I see better your point -- these are *completely* redundant.

I've replaced this section with a brief reference and link into the the existing one, as that seems better. Sorry for the duplication!

This also allows the return's storage to be matched into a local `returned var`
variable declaration within a function body, which can then be initialized and
used just like any other `var` declaration. The storage used for the declaration

> is exactly that provided to a call to the function For example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is exactly that provided to a call to the function. For example:
```

return type_, and then the pattern is matched to bind names.

There are also a set of restrictions on control flow in the presence of a
`returned var` declaration to provide simple and understandable behavior while
having reasonable expressivity:

1. Once a `returned var` is in scope, another `returned var` cannot be declared.
2. Any `return` with a `returned var` in scope must be `return var;` and returns
   the declared `returned var`.
3. If control flow exits the scope of a `returned var` in any way other than a
   `return var;`, it ends the lifetime of the declared `returned var` exactly
   like it would end the lifetime of a `var` declaration.
4. There must be a `returned var` declaration in scope for any `return var;`
   statement.

These rules allows code like:

```carbon
fn MaybeReturnedVar() -> Point {
  while (KeepTryingThings()) {
    returned var p: Point = ...;
    if (...) {
      return var;
    }
  }

  return MakeMeAPoint();
}
```

## Pointers

Pointers in Carbon are the primary mechanism for _indirect access_ to storage
containing some value. Dereferencing a pointer is one of the primary ways to

> form a [_reference expression_](#reference-expressions).

Reviewer: add "durable"?

refer distinctly to the point*er* and the point*ee* when needed. This ends up
critical for supporting rebinding and so without this property more permutations
of indirection would likely emerge.

Third, and most controversially, Carbon doesn't provide a straightforward way to
avoid the syntactic distinction between indirect access and direct access. This
aspect is covered by our design decision around
[syntax-free dereference](#syntax-free-dereference-and-address-of).

### Pointer syntax

The type of a pointer to a type `T` is written with a postfix `*` as in `T*`.
Dereferencing a pointer is a [_reference expression_] and is written with a
prefix `*` as in `*p`:

```carbon
var i: i32 = 42;
var p: i32* = &i;

// Form a reference expression `*p` and assign `13` to the referenced storage.
*p = 13;
```

This syntax is chosen specifically to remain as similar as possible to C++
pointer types as they are commonly written in code and are expected to be
extremely common and a key anchor of syntactic similarity between the languages.
The different alternatives and tradeoffs for this syntax issue were discussed
extensively in

> [#523](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/523).

Reviewer: Another place to link to the alternatives considered of this proposal (after adding them).

Carbon also supports an infix `->` operation, much like C++. However, Carbon
directly defines this as an exact rewrite to `*` and `.` so that `p->member`
becomes `(*p).member` for example.

**Future work:** As also covered extensively in
[#523](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/523), one of the
primary challenges of the C++ syntax is the composition of a prefix dereference
operation and other postfix or infix operations, especially when chained
together such as a classic C++ frustrations of mixes of dereference and
indexing: `(*(*p)[42])[13]`. Where these compositions are sufficiently common to
create ergonomic problems, the plan is to introduce custom syntax analogous to
`->` that rewrites down to the grouped dereference. However, nothing beyond `->`
itself is currently provided. Extending this, including the exact design and
scope of extension desired, is a future work area.

> ### Syntax-free dereference and address-of

Reviewer: Seems like this (and possibly parts of the previous section) really are about alternatives considered that belong in the proposal document itself and only linked to from this document?

A closely related concern to syntax-free dereference is syntax-free address-of.
Here, Carbon supports one very narrow form of this: implicitly taking the
address of the implicit object parameter of member functions. Currently that is
the only place with such an implicit affordance. It is designed to be
syntactically sound to extend to other parameters, but currently that is not
planned.

### Dereferencing customization

Carbon should support user-defined pointer-like types such as _smart pointers_
using a similar pattern as operator overloading or other expression syntax. That
is, it should rewrite the expression into a member function call on an
interface. Types can then implement this interface to expose pointer-like
_user-defined dereference_ syntax.

The interface might look like:

```carbon
interface Pointer {
  let ValueT:! Type;
  fn Dereference[self: Self]() -> ValueT*;
}
```

Here is an example using a hypothetical `TaggedPtr` that carries some extra
integer tag next to the pointer it emulates:

```carbon
class TaggedPtr(T:! Type) {
  var tag: Int32;
  var ptr: T*;
}
external impl [T:! Type] TaggedPtr(T) as Pointer {

>   let ValueT:$ T;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  let ValueT:! T;
```

  fn Dereference[self: Self]() -> T* { return self.ptr; }
}

fn Test(arg: TaggedPtr(T), dest: TaggedPtr(TaggedPtr(T))) {
  **dest = *arg;
  *dest = arg;
}
```

There is one tricky aspect of this. The function in the interface which
implements a pointer-like dereference must return a raw pointer which the
language then actually dereferences to form a reference expression similar to
that formed by `var` declarations. This interface is implemented for normal
pointers as a no-op:

```carbon
impl [T:! Type] T* as Pointer {

>   let ValueT:$ Type = T;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  let ValueT:! Type = T;
```

}
```

Dereference expressions such as `*x` are syntactically rewritten to use this
interface to get a raw pointer and then that raw pointer is dereferenced. If we
imagine this language level dereference to form a reference expression as a
unary `deref` operator, then `(*x)` becomes
`(deref (x.(Pointer.Dereference)()))`.

Carbon will also use a simple syntactic rewrite for implementing `x->Method()`
as `(*x).Method()` without separate or different customization.

## `const`-qualified types

Carbon provides the ability to qualify a type `T` with the keyword `const` to
get a `const`-qualified type: `const T`. This is exclusively an API-subsetting
feature in Carbon -- for more fundamentally "immutable" use cases, value
expressions and bindings should be used instead. Pointers to `const`-qualified
types in Carbon provide access to an object with an API subset that can help
model important requirements like ensuring usage is exclusively by way of a
_thread-safe_ interface subset of an otherwise _thread-compatible_ type.

The `const T` type has the same representation as `T` with the same field names,
but all of its field types are also `const`-qualified. Other than fields, all

> other members `T` are also members of `const T`, and impl lookup ignores the

Reviewer: Wouldn't `addr` methods not be members of `const T` (unless the `self` parameter has type `const Self*`)? I guess that raises questions about how implementations would work. Maybe state that while the `addr` methods would still be members, calling them on a `const T` would be an error if they take a `T*`, but calling non-`addr` methods would generally be fine?

Author: Throughout this section, `const T` refers to the *type*, not to a value pattern.

The methods would be members of the *type*, but their receiver can only bind to a reference expression of that type.

The current text already seems to clarify this, so not sure what further change would help here?

Reviewer: I was only thinking of `const T` as a type, not a value pattern.

The current text is not clear about this. It says words like "API subset" which is misleading if it has all the same methods. I think a table or set of bullets that list the cases and what happens would make things clear.

This section should *also* talk about using `const` in patterns, particularly `addr self: const Self*`, which is used in `ReferenceImplicitAs`, but hasn't been defined.

Author: Hmm, makes sense. And there is a surprising aspect here -- `x: T` and `x: const T` aren't distinguished for value expressions.

I've added the table and a discussion of the pattern implications, does that make sense?

about the Carbon _expressions_ that produce or reference values and objects.
Categorizing the expressions themselves allows us to be more precise and
articulate important differences not captured without looking at the expression
itself.

### Expression categories

There are three expression categories in Carbon:

-   [_Value expressions_](#value-expressions) produce abstract, read-only
    _values_ that cannot be modified or have its address taken.
-   [_Reference expressions_](#reference-expressions) refer to _objects_ with
    _storage_ where a value may be read or written and the object's address can
    be taken.
    -   [_Durable reference expressions_](#durable-reference-expressions) are
        reference expressions which cannot refer to _temporary_ storage, but
        must refer to some storage that outlives the full expression.
    -   [_Ephemeral reference expressions_](#ephemeral-reference-expressions)
        are reference expressions which _can_ refer to temporary storage.
-   [_Initializing expressions_](#initializing-expressions) which require
    storage to be provided as an input and initializes an object in that

>     storage.

Reviewer 3: "input" could give the impression that the storage is supposed to be a syntactically-visible operand. I'd suggest something like "implicit input" instead.

More broadly, I had a hard time wrapping my head around this category until I got to the discussion of function returns. I think it would help to mention that example much earlier, either into this section or by making it the very next section.

Author: I like directly mentioning the function return example. I tried rewording the text to avoid the "input" confusion in several ways, PTAL!

The syntax and syntactic context of an expression fully determines both the
expressions initial category and which if any conversions from one category to

> another must take place. Carbon specifically works to avoid involving the _type

Reviewer 3: IIUC this isn't always true of indexing expressions -- if `a` is a value expression, `a[i]` might be a durable reference expression or a value expression, depending on what interfaces `a` implements.

Author: Ah, you are right.

Do you think it is worth keeping some of this text but calling out indexing as an exception? Or should we just let this go entirely?

Reviewer 3: I lean towards letting it go. I don't see a clear benefit for either implementers or users from knowing that expression category only occasionally depends on types (especially if something as common as indexing is one of the exceptions).

system_ in this determination as a way to reduce the complexity required within
the type system.

The general conversions and the semantics implied between these categories are
below:

-   An _initializing expression_ can be formed from:
    -   A _value expression_ by using the value to initialize an object in the
        provided storage, analogous to
        [direct initialization](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/direct_initialization)
        in C++.

>     -   A _durable reference expression_ by copying the referenced object into

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    -   A _reference expression_ by copying the referenced object into
```

Author: This was intentional as it makes the conversions acyclic -- an ephemeral reference expression can only be formed by converting from some other expression category, and the only two categories are durable reference expressions and initializing expressions.

So I think the only case that can actually happen here is the durable one?

Reviewer 3: It looks cyclic to me either way: value expression -> initializing expression -> ephemeral reference expression -> value expression.

Admittedly, the graph has a somewhat more elegant structure without this change: it consists solely of that cycle, plus edges from durable reference expression to everything else. However, I'm not sure that elegance is actually useful for anything.

Author: I guess the nice thing is that because the required category must be one of {initializing, reference, value}, and all three of those are in the cycle, there is no way to actually cycle here.

The cycle that seemed concerning was an arbitrary number of cycles between initializing and ephemeral reference before finally landing on a value.

Maybe there is a better way to express the result here? I do think it makes sense in general to keep the edges *minimal* though.

Reviewer 3: > I guess the nice thing is that because the required category must be one of {initializing, reference, value}, and all three of those are in the cycle, there is no way to actually cycle here.

There's no way to actually cycle _if your destination is reachable_, but you can still cycle endlessly if you're trying to reach "durable reference". So in practice I think we're going to need to implement this in terms of a precomputed transitive closure, such as the table Josh suggested in his comment. At that point, I'm not sure that keeping the specification of the graph minimal buys us much.

And yet it seems potentially costly: it means that to convert an ephemeral reference expression to an initializing expression requires two steps, when it could be implemented in one step (as evidenced by the durable -> initializing conversion). To anticipate two possible counterarguments:
- We can't dismiss that as an implementation detail that will be optimized away, because this scheme is all about those implementation details. 
- If the durable -> initializing conversion just consists of the same two steps as the ephemeral -> initializing conversion, then we shouldn't be treating it as a single primitive step; we should say that durable reference expressions can convert to value or ephemeral reference expressions (or maybe only ephemeral reference expressions), and then rely on transitive closure.

Author: I think all of this is made moot with the new organization.

-   `var` _identifier_`:` _< expression |_ `auto` _> [_ `=` _value ]_`;`

These are just simple examples of binding patterns used directly in local
declarations. Local `let` and `var` declarations build on Carbon's general
[pattern matching](/docs/design/pattern_matching.md) design, with `var`
declarations implicitly starting off within a `var` pattern while `let`
declarations introduce patterns that work the same as function parameters and
others with bindings that produce values by default.

### Consuming function parameters

Just as part of a `let` binding can use a `var` prefix to become a variable
pattern and bind names that will form reference expressions to the variable's
storage, so can function parameters:

```carbon
fn Consume(var x: SomeData) {
  // We can mutate and use variable that `x` refers to here.
}
```

This allows us to model an important special case of function inputs -- those
that are _consumed_ by the function, either through local processing or being
moved into some persistent storage. Marking these in the pattern and thus
signature of the function changes the expression category of arguments in the

> caller, causing them to become _initializing expressions_ that directly

Reviewer 3: Become, or be converted to?

Author: This was trying to contrast with patterns that *don't* get marked this way, but that is clearly a bit ambiguous.

I've switched the wording around to talk first about a contextual requirement, and then mention how that may in turn trigger a conversion.

initialize storage dedicated-to and owned-by the function parameter.

This pattern serves the same purpose as C++'s pass-by-value when used with types
that have non-trivial resources attached to pass ownership into the function and
consume the resource. But rather than that being the seeming _default_, Carbon
makes this a use case that requires a special marking on the declaration.

## Reference expressions

_Reference expressions_ refer to _objects_ with _storage_ where a value may be
read or written and the object's address can be taken. There are two
sub-categories of reference expressions: _durable_ and _ephemeral_.

Calling a [method](/docs/design/classes.md#methods) on a reference expression
where the method's `self` parameter has an `addr` specifier can always
implicitly take the address of the referred-to object. This address is passed as
a [pointer](#pointers) to the `self` parameter for such methods.

### Durable reference expressions

_Durable reference expressions_ are those where the object's storage outlives
the full expression and the address could be meaningfully propagated out of it
as well.

> There are two expressions that require one of their operands to be a durable
> reference expression in Carbon:
> 
> -   [Assignment expressions](/docs/design/assignment.md) require the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are two contexts that require a durable reference expression in Carbon:

-   [Assignment statements](/docs/design/assignment.md) require the
```

    left-hand-side of the `=` to be a durable reference. This stronger
    requirement is enforced before the expression is rewritten to dispatch into
    the `Carbon.Assign.Op` interface method.
-   [Address-of expressions](#pointer-syntax) require their operand to be a
    durable reference and compute the address of the referenced object.

There are several kinds of expressions that produce durable references in
Carbon:

-   Names of objects introduced with a
    [variable binding](#binding-patterns-and-local-variables-with-let-and-var):
    `x`
-   Dereferenced [pointers](#pointers): `*p`

> -   Names of subobjects through member access: `x.member` or `p->member`

Reviewer 3: This only applies if `x` is a durable reference expression, right?

Author: Yes, clarified I think.

within the variable pattern's storage when used. Variable patterns require their
matched expression to be an _initializing expression_ and provide their storage
to it to be initialized.

```carbon
fn MutateThing(ptr: i64*);

fn Example() {
  // `1` starts as a value expression, and the `let` binds a name to it.
  let x: i64 = 1;

  // `2` also starts as a value expression, but the variable binding requires it
  // to be converted to an initializing expression by using the value `2` to
  // initialize the provided variable storage that `y` will refer to.
  var y: i64 = 2;

  // Allowed to take the address and mutate `y` as it is a durable reference
  // expression.
  MutateThing(&y);

  // ❌ This would be an error though due to trying to take the address of the
  // value expression `x`.
  MutateThing(&x);
}
```

### Local variables

A local binding pattern can be introduced with either the `let` or `var`
keyword. The `let` introducer begins a value pattern just like the default
patterns in other contexts. The `var` introducer works exactly the same as
introducing the pattern in some other context with `var` -- there's just no need

> for the outer `let`.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure I get the meaning of the second part of the sentence, regarding the "outer let". Does that refer to the optional initialization, or the fact `let` is the default & not required in some situations?

Author: It was trying to point out that `var x: T` is in essence the same as `let var x: T`. But I think that's just confusing matters. The next paragraph I think clarifies this better, so I've tried to simplify this one. WDYT?

Author: (resolving for now)

-   [Assignment statements](/docs/design/assignment.md) require the
    left-hand-side of the `=` to be a durable reference. This stronger
    requirement is enforced before the expression is rewritten to dispatch into
    the `Carbon.Assign.Op` interface method.
-   [Address-of expressions](#pointer-syntax) require their operand to be a
    durable reference and compute the address of the referenced object.

There are several kinds of expressions that produce durable references in
Carbon:

-   Names of objects introduced with a
    [variable binding](#binding-patterns-and-local-variables-with-let-and-var):
    `x`
-   Dereferenced [pointers](#pointers): `*p`
-   Names of subobjects through member access to some other durable reference
    expression: `x.member` or `p->member`
-   [Indexing](/docs/design/expressions/indexing.md) some other durable
    reference expression: `array[i]`

Durable reference expressions can only be produced _directly_ by one of these
expressions. They are never produced by converting one of the other expression
categories into a reference expression.

### Ephemeral reference expressions

> We call the reference expressions formed through [temporary materialization]

Reviewer 4: Is the intent to have a link on `temporary materialization`?

Author: Fixed, thanks!

is classically available on a C++ `const std::string&` like querying the
capacity cannot be implemented with the customized value representation because
it loses access to this additional state. Carbon allows type authors to make an
explicit choice about whether they want to work with a restricted API and
leverage a custom value representation or not.

**Open question:** Beyond the specific syntax used where we currently have a
placeholder `value_rep = T;`, we need to explore exactly what the best
relationship is with the customization point. For example, should this syntax
immediately forward declare `impl as ReferenceImplicitAs where .T = T`, thereby
allowing an out-of-line definition of the `Convert` method and `... where _` to
pick up the associated type from the syntax. Alternatively, the syntactic marker
might be integrated into the `impl` declaration for `ReferenceImplicitAs`
itself.

### Polymorphic types

Value expressions and value bindings can be used with
[polymorphic types](/docs/design/classes.md#inheritance), for example:

```carbon
base class MyBase { ... }

fn UseBase(b: MyBase) { ... }

> class Derived extends MyBase { ... }

Reviewer 4: Small update from the recent changes
```suggestion
class Derived {
  extend base: MyBase;
  ...
}
```

fn PassDerived() {
  var d: Derived = ...;
  // Allowed to pass `d` here:
  UseBase(d);
}
```

This is still allowed to create a copy or to move, but it must not _slice_. Even
if a copy is created, it must be a `Derived` object, even though this may limit
the available implementation strategies.

### Interop with C++ `const &` and `const` methods

While value expressions cannot have their address taken in Carbon, they should
be interoperable with C++ `const &`s and C++ `const`-qualified methods. This
will in-effect "pin" some object (potentially a copy or temporary) into memory
and allow C++ to take its address. Without supporting this, values would likely
create an untenable interop ergonomic barrier. However, this does create some
additional constraints on value expressions and a way that their addresses can
escape unexpectedly.

Despite interop requiring an address to implement, the address isn't guaranteed
to be stable or useful or point back to some original object necessarily. The
ability of the implementation to introduce copies or a temporary specifically
for the purpose of the interop remains.

**Future work:** when a type customizes its value representation, as currently

> specified this will break the use of `const &` C++ APIs with such an value. We

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specified this will break the use of `const &` C++ APIs with such a value. We
```

should extend the rules around value representation customization to require
that either the representation type can be converted to (a copy) of the
customized type, or implements an interop-specific interface to compute a
`const` pointer to the original object used to form the representation object.
This will allow custom representations to either create copies for interop or
retain a pointer to the original object and expose that for interop as desired.

### Escape hatches for value addresses in Carbon

**Open question:** It may be necessary to provide some amount of escape hatch
for taking the address of values. The
[C++ interop](#interop-with-c-const--and-const-methods) above already takes
their address functionally. Currently, this is the extent of an escape hatch to
the restrictions on values.

If a further escape hatch is needed, this kind of fundamental weakening of the
semantic model would be a good case for some syntactic marker like Rust's
`unsafe`, although rather than a region, it would seem better to tie it directly
to the operation in question. For example:

```carbon
class S {

>   fn ValueMemberFunction[me: Self]();
>   fn AddrMemberFunction[addr me: const Self*]();

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  fn ValueMemberFunction[self: Self]();
  fn AddrMemberFunction[addr self: const Self*]();
```

feature in Carbon -- for more fundamentally "immutable" use cases, value
expressions and bindings should be used instead. Pointers to `const`-qualified
types in Carbon provide access to an object with an API subset that can help
model important requirements like ensuring usage is exclusively by way of a
_thread-safe_ interface subset of an otherwise _thread-compatible_ type.

The `const T` type has the same representation as `T` with the same field names,
but all of its field types are also `const`-qualified. Other than fields, all
other members `T` are also members of `const T`, and impl lookup ignores the
`const` qualification. There is an implicit conversion from `T` to `const T`,
but not the reverse. Conversion of reference expressions to value expressions is
defined in terms of `const T` reference expressions to `T` value expressions.

It is expected that `const T` will largely occur as part of a
[pointer](#pointers), as the express purpose is to form reference expressions.
Carbon will support conversions between pointers to `const`-qualified types that
follow the same rules as used in C++ to avoid inadvertent loss of

> `const`-qualification.

Reviewer: Maybe it would be good to have something short here saying `const T*` means `(const T)*`, in addition to the other places?

Author: Done, and also linked to the type_operators.md docs (that I wrote but forgot to `git add` previously, sorry about that).

will be accessible as [_value expressions_](#value-expressions) using the normal
member access syntax for value expressions of a type. These will be implemented
by either accessing a copy of the object in the non-pointer case or a pointer to
the original object in the pointer case. A representation of `const Self`
requires copying to be valid for the type. This provides the builtin
functionality but allows explicitly controlling which representation should be
used.

If no customization is provided, the implementation will select one based on a
set of heuristics. Some examples:

-   Non-copyable types and polymorphic types would use a `const Self*`.
-   Small objects that are trivially copied in a machine register would use
    `const Self`.

When a custom type is provided, it must not be `Self` (or the other two cases).
The type provided will be used on function call boundaries and as the
implementation representation for `let` bindings and other value expressions
referencing an object of the type. A specifier of `value_rep = T;` will require
that the type `impls ReferenceImplicitAs(T)` using the following interface:

```carbon

> interface ReferenceImplicitAs(T:! type) {

Reviewer: From discussion:
- should make `T` an associated type.
- could make `value_rep = T;` act as a forward declaration of `impl as ReferenceImplicitAs where .Dest = T`; this would mean that the definition could just write `impl as ReferenceImplicitAs where _`

Author: Added.

-   [_Reference expressions_](#reference-expressions) refer to _objects_ with
    _storage_ where a value may be read or written and the object's address can
    be taken.

> -   [_Initializing expressions_](#initializing-expressions) which require

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-   [_Initializing expressions_](#initializing-expressions) require
```

    storage to be provided implicitly when evaluating the expression. The
    expression then initializes an object in that storage. These are used to
    model function returns, which can construct the returned value directly in
    the caller's storage.

Expressions in one category can be converted to any other category when needed.
The primitive conversion steps used are:

-   [_Value binding_](#value-binding) forms a value expression from the current
    value of the object referenced by a reference expression.
-   [_Direct initialization_](#direct-initialization) converts a value
    expression into an initializing expression.
-   [_Copy initialization_](#copy-initialization) converts a reference
    expression into an initializing expression.
-   [_Temporary materialization_](#temporary-materialization) converts an
    initializing expression into a reference expression.

These conversion steps combine to provide the transitive conversion table:

|               From: | value                   | reference | initializing     |
| ------------------: | ----------------------- | --------- | ---------------- |

> |        to **value** | ==                      | read      | temporary + read |
> |    to **reference** | direct init + temporary | ==        | temporary        |
> | to **initializing** | direct init             | copy init | ==               |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|        to **value** | ==                      | read      | materialize + read |
|    to **reference** | direct init + materialize | ==        | materialize        |
| to **initializing** | direct init             | copy init | ==               |
```

    -   [_Ephemeral reference expressions_](#ephemeral-reference-expressions)
        are reference expressions which _can_ refer to temporary storage.
-   [_Initializing expressions_](#initializing-expressions) which require
    storage to be provided implicitly when evaluating the expression. The
    expression then initializes an object in that storage. These are used to

>     model function returns.

Reviewer 3: I think I'd need a little more detail to get the intuition here.

```suggestion
    model function returns, which can construct the returned value directly in the caller's storage.
```

Expressions in one category can be converted to any other category when needed.
The primitive conversion steps used are:

-   A <a id="read">_read_</a> converts a reference expression into a value
    expression.
-   <a id="direct-init">_Direct initialization_</a> converts a value expression
    into an initializing expression.
-   <a id="copy-init">_Copy initialization_</a> converts a reference expression
    into an initializing expression.
-   <a id="temporary-materialization">_Temporary materialization_</a> converts
    an initializing expression into a reference expression.

These conversion steps combine to provide the transitive conversion table:

|               From: | value                           | reference     | initializing             |
| ------------------: | ------------------------------- | ------------- | ------------------------ |
|        to **value** | ==                              | [read][]      | [temporary][] + [read][] |
|    to **reference** | [direct init][] + [temporary][] | ==            | [temporary][]            |

> | to **initializing** | [direct init][]                 | [copy init][] | ==                       |

Reviewer 5: From #infra discussion, I see you're modifying this table to add links. To copy my comment there:

The list and the table are separated by one line of explanatory text ("These conversion steps combine to provide the transitive conversion table:"), so the links serve to suggest mainly that the linked content is elsewhere, making the links look broken when they have differing labels, but they don't move to different text (because the linked line is already on screen).

To summarize, I believe the prior table (no links) was actually better because the links are now going to interrupt reading.

Separately, you may also consider moving "From:" out of the corner. The other headers are meant to be read vertically, so it would be natural to read this header vertically too. For contrast, "To" is per-row and not-bolded, whereas "From" is once and bolded -- so the different labeling can be a source of confusion. (but it's hard to un-bold "From", so you'd either be looking at an html table or bolding "to" for consistency)

Reviewer: I think having the "From:" right-justified is helpful to make it clear it is describing the column headers.

Author: The table links are gone, and I"ve also added (short) sections for the four things, and used normal linking to them from the more condensed bulleted list, and linked back to them where useful in the doc.

converting it into one as necessary.

A _variable pattern_ can be introduced with the `var` keyword to create an
object with storage when matched. Every binding pattern name introduced within a
variable pattern is called a _variable binding_ and forms a
[_durable reference expression_](#durable-reference-expressions) to an object
within the variable pattern's storage when used. Variable patterns require their
matched expression to be an _initializing expression_ and provide their storage
to it to be initialized.

```carbon
fn MutateThing(ptr: i64*);

fn Example() {

>   // `1` starts as a value expression, and the `let` binds a name to it.

Reviewer 3: This phrasing feels awkward to me, because I think of `let` as binding a name to a value, not an expression.

```suggestion
  // `1` starts as a value expression, which is what a `let` binding expects.
```

-   Dereferenced [pointers](#pointers): `*p`
-   Names of subobjects through member access to some other durable reference
    expression: `x.member` or `p->member`
-   [Indexing](/docs/design/expressions/indexing.md) some other durable

>     reference expression: `array[i]`

Reviewer: This is a subset of the criteria from `indexing.md`. In particular, indexing into value expression with a type like C++'s `std::span` should also produce a durable reference expression

Author: Tried to make this a bit broader.

-   [Indexing](/docs/design/expressions/indexing.md) some other durable
    reference expression: `array[i]`

Durable reference expressions can only be produced _directly_ by one of these
expressions. They are never produced by converting one of the other expression
categories into a reference expression.

### Ephemeral reference expressions

> We call the reference expressions formed through [temporary materialization]

Reviewer: Broken link

Author: Fixed.

-   Small objects that are trivially copied in a machine register would use
    `const Self`.

When a custom type is provided, it must not be `Self`, `const Self`, or a
pointer to either. The type provided will be used on function call boundaries
and as the implementation representation for `let` bindings and other value
expressions referencing an object of the type. A specifier of `value_rep = T;`
will require that the type containing that specifier satisfies the constraint
`impls ReferenceImplicitAs where .T = T` using the following interface:

```carbon
interface ReferenceImplicitAs {

>   let T:! type;

Reviewer: Now that this is an associated type, do we want to say that this interface is implemented for all types, so you can always get this type? For example, we may want to return the value representation type of the element type when iterating through a container.

Reviewer: Based on discussion: we don't want to make the `Convert` function available for all types, even if its okay to make the associated type available. This suggests an alternative implementation:
```
interface ValueRepresentation {
  let T:! type;
}

interface ReferenceImplicitAs {
  // Possibly with a template constraint that `T` is not
  // `Self`, `const Self`, `Self*`, or `const Self*`
  extend ValueRepresentation;
  fn Convert...;
}
```
and `ValueRepresentation` would be implemented for all types.

Author: I'm hesitant to go down this path...

To start, I'd like to better understand the mechanism we're going to use where we currently have placeholder syntax `value_rep = StringView` before committing to the always-implemented interface here.

The interface has, IMO, relatively subtle and I worre brittle semantics. Exposing it as something that is guaranteed and can be coded against worries me a bit as a consequence.

For example, with this you can write a template that specializes on whether `X.(ValueRepresentation.T)` is `== const X` or `== const X*` and in those cases directly use data members on a value binding of type `X`, knowing it will work, and falling back to calling some method that is potentially implemented by conversion. Which is both really interesting but also a bit scary.

And it's more scary if you're observing an arbitrary implementation detail of the compiler by detecting whether it chose to make a type use one or the other automatically. But also maybe quite useful for template generic code?

Basically, *using* this interface seems like it might have similar code-smells to specializing a template based on the size of a type with a comment like "when the SSO buffer is too large, ...." and leveraging that the SSO buffer size is implicitly leaked into the type size. Except that specializing on type size at least *looks* suspicious, whereas this would be almost an endorsement of the pattern.

So, maybe we want to endorse that pattern. But I want to have clear use cases and think through the implications. And I'm not yet confident there. My inclination is to add basically reflective support for this in a follow-up that examines the use cases and tradeoffs here. WDYT?

Regardless, we need to figure out the `value_rep = ...` mechanic.... and maybe that will answer the question for us by in fact providing just such an interface... I'll file an issue for leads on this question to draw attention to it.

Reviewer: Let me know when you've filed the issue for leads.

Author: Filed here: https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/2990

model important requirements like ensuring usage is exclusively by way of a
_thread-safe_ interface subset of an otherwise _thread-compatible_ type.

Note that `const T` is a type qualification and is generally orthogonal to
expression categories or what form of pattern is used, including for object
parameters. Notionally, it can occur both with `addr` and value object
parameters. However, on value patterns, it is redundant as there is no
meaningful distinction between a value expression of type `T` and type
`const T`. For example, given a type and methods:

```carbon
class X {
  fn Method[self: Self]();
  fn ConstMethod[self: const Self]();
  fn AddrMethod[addr self: Self*]();
  fn AddrConstMethod[addr self: const Self*]();
}
```

The methods can be called on different kinds of expressions according to the
following table:

> |  Expression category: | `let x: X` (value) | `let x: const X` (const value) | `var x: X` (reference) | `var x: const X` (const reference) |

Reviewer: Optional: I think this might look a bit better with a forced newline

```suggestion
|  Expression category: | `let x: X`<br>(value) | `let x: const X`<br>(const value) | `var x: X`<br>(reference) | `var x: const X`<br>(const reference) |
```

Author: Done.

-   [Type elision](/proposals/p0339.md#type-elision)
-   [Type ordering](/proposals/p0618.md#type-ordering)
-   [Elide the type instead of using `auto`](/proposals/p0851.md#elide-the-type-instead-of-using-auto)
-   [Value expression escape hatches](/proposals/p2006.md#value-expression-escape-hatches)
-   [References in addition to pointers](/proposals/p2006.md#references-in-addition-to-pointers)
-   [Syntax-free or automatic dereferencing](/proposals/p2006.md#syntax-free-or-automatic-dereferencing)
-   [Exclusively using references](/proposals/p2006.md#exclusively-using-references)
-   [Alternative pointer syntaxes](/proposals/p2006.md#alternative-pointer-syntaxes)
-   [Alternative syntaxes for locals](/proposals/p2006.md#alternative-syntaxes-for-locals)

## References

-   [Proposal #257: Initialization of memory and values][p0257]
-   [Proposal #339: `var` statement][p0339]
-   [Proposal #618: `var` ordering][p0618]
-   [Proposal #851: auto keyword for vars][p0851]
-   [Proposal #2006: Values, variables, and pointers][p2006]

[p0257]: /proposals/p0257.md
[p0339]: /proposals/p0339.md
[p0618]: /proposals/p0618.md
[p0851]: /proposals/p0851.md

> [p2006]: /proposals/p2006.md

Reviewer: I thought our convention was to link to the pull request for proposals, unless specifically trying to point to a specific file in the proposal?

Author: I was finding the p-documents more useful, but you're right this isn't our current practice. I've started a discussion on what we want here in Discord and I'm happy to do whatever folks want for this PR (and fix-forward as necessary based on that discussion).
